---
title: "Blog7: GSoC (nx-parallel)"
author: Aditi Juneja
date: 2024-08-13 22:17:00 +0530
---

# Blog7: GSoC (nx-parallel)

## Week 13-14 (28th July to 9th August, 2024)

### GSoC - Coding Period (Phase 2)

## 1. Introducing a pre-commit hook for `get_info`'s updation in nx-parallel

In my initial blogs, I discussed [PR#55](https://github.com/networkx/nx-parallel/pull/55), which aimed to automate updates to the `get_info` function’s returned dictionary using a pre-commit hook, replacing the need to manually run the `_nx_parallel/update_get_info.py` script every time someone makes a change in any of the nx-parallel docstrings.

Initially, I had concerns about having a lot of unrelated merge conflicts in pull requests, but I don't think there will be a lot of those, unless it's in the `_nx_parallel/__init__.py` file. Also, Erik had the same opinion based on his experience, as indicated in [this comment](https://github.com/networkx/nx-parallel/issues/62#issuecomment-2102256774) of his. I also initially misunderstood the behaviour of `repo: local` in the pre-commit hook, mistakenly thinking it referenced the main nx-parallel branch instead of the PR branch. It turns out that `repo: local` indeed references the PR's branch.

Revisiting [PR#55](https://github.com/networkx/nx-parallel/pull/55) after nearly three months, I noticed that while the style test was passing locally, it was failing on GitHub. I first suspected that this was happening because of some inconsistency in the versions of pre-commit, ruff, black, or Python, but that wasn’t the case. After explicitly specifying all versions in the installation instructions and centralizing the `pip install` commands, the issue persisted. I considered the possibility that line breaks might differ between my local machine and GitHub CI, but that explanation didn’t align with my previous experiences with pre-commit hooks.

Upon further investigation, I observed that the order in which the files and functions were extracted from the `nx_parallel` module in the `_nx_parallel/update_get_info.py` script was different for my local machine and on the GitHub workflow. So, I sorted the files and functions after extracting them, but it still resulted in the style test's failure because some files, such as `connectivity.py`, exist in multiple modules (`approximation` and `connectivity`). I ultimately resolved this by sorting the returned `funcs` dictionary having all the data for all the functions.

Additionally, I experimented with removing `black` from the pre-commit hooks, considering both `ruff` and `black` serve formatting purposes and noting that NetworkX doesn’t include a `black` hook. While this didn’t resolve the style test issues, it raises a broader question about whether we should continue using black in nx-parallel. `Black` is a Python code formatter that ensures consistency and neatness by adhering to a strict style guide, while `ruff` is both a linter and a formatter that checks for potential errors, coding issues, and style violations. I haven’t removed `black` in this PR, but we should revisit this in the future.

While working on this PR, I also identified that the prettier repository used in one of the pre-commit hooks was archived, leading me to open [issue#73](https://github.com/networkx/nx-parallel/issues/73). I’m continuing to investigate this, drawing on similar issues such as those found [here](https://github.com/scientific-python/cookie/pull/467) (in `scientific-python/cookie`) and [here](https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/29621) (in `scikit-learn`). Also, Mridul referred to the discussions on combining `ruff` with `prettier` in [astral-sh/ruff#10738](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/10738).

## 2. Configuration in nx-parallel

I’ve addressed all the review comments from Dan, and ongoing discussions are helping to further refine the documentation for nx-parallel configurations in `Config.md`. One of the key changes involved removing the `ParallelConfig` class from the `__all__`, following concerns from Dan regarding whether users should have the ability to modify this class directly.

Additionally, I changed the default `backend` to `"loky"` instead of `None` because otherwise default configs were giving the user an error, which was a bit unwelcoming. I'm also considering changing the default `n_jobs` to `-1` instead of `None`. I believe this adjustment would be beneficial for users who are new to nx-parallel, as it would allow them to run their algorithms on all CPU cores without needing to understand or configure the parallel options in detail. Also, I think scikit-learn also uses `n_jobs=-1` as their default.

## 3. Performance heatmaps and benchmarking in nx-parallel

I’m hesitant to proceed with updating the timing script and generating new heatmaps just to check off items from my initial GSoC proposal, especially because generating heatmaps is time-consuming and resource-expensive, and I think they will probably be removed in the future because they are not a very nice(standard) way of presenting a library's performance improvement. Similarly, for benchmarks, I might update the benchmarks to run with various joblib parameters, but we might not maintain asv benchmarks in nx-parallel in the future, because asv benchmarks are good when we are comparing a library or a package with its past versions but not the best when it comes to comparing how fast a library is compared to some other library. But all this will require further discussions with my mentors.

My primary focus moving forward will be on getting the configurations PR and the pre-commit hook PR merged, and then adding more parallel algorithms, and also preparing for the EuroSciPy talk. Additionally, I’ll explore better ways to display performance improvements by nx-parallel, and also look into tools like [conbench](https://conbench.github.io/conbench/) for benchmarking.

## 4. Other Activities in the Community

- EuroSciPy talk meetings - [notes](https://hackmd.io/@Schefflera-Arboricola/rylqrtQ90/edit)
- **Waiting for review** [PR#334](https://github.com/scientific-python/specs/pull/334) - Updated SPEC 2
